# Star Citizen Live | 11/27/25 | Lots of Ship Talk (https://youtu.be/wGN_kUF8cAw?si=VhXKOBs4MTEZLv1V)
## With: John Crewe - Vehicle Director, Ben Curtis - Vehicle Art Director, Mark Gibson - Lead Vehicle Content Designer
### General
- Delivered 27 vehicles this year
- Year before was 23 or so vehicles - Crewe
- Not a single concept this year. First year of straight-to-flyable or backlog ships only.
- How do you make the decisions about making a new ship vs a backlog ship? - Jared
  - When it comes to the backlog ships, we're not going to just release ships without their main gameplay loop or the main gameplay loop won't be live during the time the ship's being worked on. - John
  - "We don't wanna start and go through a whole vehicle to get to the end and not be able to release it." - John
  - "We don't always succeed." The Clipper beat crafting to release, for example. - Jared & John
### Engineering Work
- Because ship design evolved over the last 8-10 years, it means how they've set stuff up has changed. This means how they deconstruct/reconstruct the ship for engineering differs depending on when it was released. - Mark
- For initial release, everything will support engineering but it'll be at different stages. - John
  - Everything has to work, but a single seater has less work/requirements than a Polaris. Single seaters can do repairs through cockpit initially.
  - (referring to above comment) Even if ships don't have physical components yet, they will be impacted the same. - John
- "What about armor?" - Jared (Q from online)
  - **Just finished code checkin today. As soon as build reaches PTU, armor will be part of engineering.** - Jared
- There's an ISC next week for PTU. - Jared
- Big engineering doc releasing along side 4.5. - Jared
- They're shooting to get 4.5 out before end of year. - Jared
### Gold Standard
- There are ships still needing gold standard. What is gold standard and what ships are getting it next year? - Jared
- "For me, it's about if a ship was released today it has all of the features and functionality it has when it releases if it's brand new:" - Ben
  - All of its components/physical items
  - Different interactions
  - Making sure metrics are correct
  - Less about making sylistic changes just because you can
### Gold Standard vs Rework
- Sometimes we do a gold standard, sometimes we do a rework, sometimes we do a Mk II (like the Hornet) - Jared
- With reworks vs Mk 2, depends on what they want to achieve - Mark
  - When we made 600i, we had a particular vision of how we wanted the interior to be used. As the game evolved, the interior just didn't work for what they wanted the ship to do/achieve. If that ship was left, it wouldn't fulfill its role or purpose. It needs to be taken back and re-reviewed. **That's a rework.** - Mark
  - **Gold Standard** is bringing a ship "up to scratch", like missing a suit locker, or broken weapon rack. Doesn't require fundamental changes.
  - **Mk II** comes from when the original fits the role but we want to make it bigger and better. We don't want to remove the original because the role was being fulfilled.
- **The Aurora is getting a Gold Standard.** Interior mostly works, but tweaks needed to work with our gameplay loop. They don't wanna change what the an Aurora is.
- **An Aurora Mk II is coming.** It will expand on the original with new RSI style. - John
- **Aurora Mk II coming first half 2026.** - Jared
### Cargo Ship Changes
- **Railen coming in 2026.** - Jared
- Hull series concepted 2015. Originally using old cargo Freight Units (FUs), but now we use Standard Cargo Units (SCUs). - John
- Hull C was pretty close to original cargo based on conversion rate. - John
- Hull A was 48, but was increased to 64. 48 didn't fit with cargo breakdown based on crate refactor for SCUs. - John
- **They want 32 SCU crates to be the largest container.** That has knock-on effects for the Hull D and Hull E. - John
- **Hull B was 384 SCU. It's now going to be 512 SCU. It can still land planetside with cargo.** - John
- The Hull be went from a cross formation (+) to an X formation (X) for cargo bits. - Jared
- **Hull B is coming in 2026.** - John and Jared
- **Railen 328 to 640.** Triangles missing in hologram. They're currently working out the aesthetics, but don't wanna end up with weird shapes for cargo containers. It'll support standard cargo metrics, but will keep the visual of triangles. Haven't fully resolved that yet. - John and Ben
- **Hull D & E cargo changes: Cargo is going down a LOT. Hull D = 6912 SCU, Hull E = 12288 SCU. It's a big drop.** People over the years have mentioned how boing loading/unloading 3000+ containers is going to be boring, even with an org. Economy and performance are also huge concerns. These sizes are the absolute top though. D & E are considered the peak of hauling. There were also huge quirks and issues when looking at the designs. - John
- **Ironclad (both types) going up. Ironclad 1536 -> 2204. Assault 1152 -> 1440. They may change slightly, but the proportion is accurate.** Bulkhead and ladder changing allowed this. - John & Mark
- Aurora Mk I sneak peak image had the Aurora inside of an Ironclad. - Ben
- **Aurora Mk II will come with all of the Kickstarter campaign paints.** - Jared & Ben
### No Silhouette Thing for Citizen Con
- There are 3 outstanding ships from the silhouettes in 2024:
  - **MTC silhouette was the MFC (fabrication vehicle) mentioned in MDC video.** Expands open, Has shielding - John
  - **Anvil Auxilia - Clipper in Atlas ground vehicle.** Crafting + T2 med bed. Nice forward operating base. - John
  - **CNOU Forge (name pending) - Another crafting ship.** Small/medium ship w/ crafting area bigger than in Clipper. **Also has onboard refinery. Also has ground extractors to extract resources.** Currently on pause. Required features aren't far enough along and it picked up a few new features. - John & Ben
- **"Is crafting coming in 2026? We're gonna try!"**  - Jared
### Community Questions: Perseus
- Will you be adding graviational plates to the outside walkway of the Perseus? No. There's bugs/tech issues with it in stations. It's not to say it won't ever be thought of later, but it can't be done with current implementation and it wasn't meant for ships. - John & Mark
- Why does the Perseus pilot have control over the ship's torpedos when the Polaris pilot can't control the torpedoes? **In 4.5, one of the Polaris bridge station (gun, not missile) will have torpedo control.** There's still reason to go down to missile area: 360 camera + you can queue up to 8 torps from actual torp room. The pilot still can't fire them as a balance issue. The Perseus torps are way smaller and do less damage. - John & Ben
- Without looking at chat, John already predicted the question "but the Idris has control of the rail gun, why can't the Polaris pilot have control of the torpedoes? If you don't give the pilot control over a fixed weapon, the weapon becomes useless because only the pilot can target it. It doesn't mean they're fully happy with the balance on the Idris and may look at it later. They also couldn't move the torpedo to the co-pilot on the Polaris because then the pilot would just pilot from the other chair. It's multi-layered/balance issues. - John & Ben
- Ben didn't want the Polaris to have much signage. He wanted it to feel like "a cold, intimidating brutalist space" -- a war machine. Based on feedback, he learned how much players want signage. Same with the lighting. Perseus benefited from these lessons. Polaris will eventually get a pass, but no ETA for when they can even consider it. "Let the dust settle, look at at what was really successful, learn from it." Again, not currently scheduled. - Ben
- Shark mouth Perseus skin? Maybe. - Ben
- Star Kitten Perseus paint? It needs to "feel right". Not right now, unless Chris asks me to. - Ben
- How will ammo be replaced on Perseus? **Short term plans be able to RRR from select ships from cargo grids to ships docked aboard a ship. Same will apply to larger ships for short term. Mid-long term, they will feed from space next to weapon.** - John
### Community Questions: Salvation
- Can you add a button to back of Salvation to keep expelling boxes? It's a bug. It should keep outputting boxes when you get out of seat. - John
- Will the Salvation fit in and work with the Galaxy refinery module? It'll fit inside the rear hanger and then you can move the cargo to refine it. - John and Mark
- Why lock the salvage beams to modified cinches as opposed to upgradeable? The role of the ship is to be an introduction. The heads should be an easy experience. It's forgiving but has bad yield. If you like salvage, they can progress to a more advanced ship. - Mark
### Community Questions: Clipper
- Clipper is the most successful Drake intro ship ever released - Jared
- What will it be able to craft? Designed to be FPS & small ship items. Still in flux cuz it's in development, so can't give a firm answer. - John
- Why is the Clipper, despite its massive size, only have 2 S1 shields? One big concern was that this ship could get a little OP. Also, if the shields are destroyed, you can craft a new S1 shield component on the ship itself. It's self-sustaining in that sense. - John
- Why limit the Clipper in speed to below 1000, as opposed to 1100-1200? Balance. - Ben & Mark
### Community Questions: Wolf
- Will the kits for the Wolf be available in-game for aUEC? Yes, eventually. The Wolf weapon kits are no different than the Heartseeker turret (will be available in 4.5) or Scorpius turrets (already in store) or Idris-K/Idris-T kit (not in-game for aUEC yet, but eventually will). They're trying to avoid creating tons of variants in general. - Jared
- "A lot of people seem to think everything will enter UEC shops. The only guarantee is that they'll be attainable in-game. Previously, the only way to get them *was* UEC shops. But now loot is diversifying, crafting is somewhere around the corner, and Wikelo -- everybody's 'favorite'. All of these are ways to acquire things in-game, not just UEC shops. Wolf kits will be in UEC shops though." - Jared
### Community Questions: Generalist Ships
- Any other manufacturers that might make some generalist ships from? In 2026, there will definitely be at least one more. - John
- Why have categories for ships changed in 4.4? John had a bug come across his desk where a ground vehicle was labeled "Ground Ground" and it annoyed him immensely. He looked into it and discovered a thread of inconsistencies. He started pulling at them, aligning them. He removed the "Ground" career cuz that's not a career. Normalized freight names (named 5 years ago based on outdated concepts).
- Shipyard is getting reworked in 2026. - John and Jared
### Community Questions: Ironclad
- Have you made any good progress on the Catterpillar & Ironclad command modules? Yes. First playable is coming up soon for the "parasite" take control of the ship from command module. Currently on track to have actual release from Ironclad. - Mark
### Community Questions
- Downward facing landing lights? Extending lights was unperformant and just blinded everyone nearby. **So, there are plans called LAMP -- light amplification. So people can fly at night. In early stages. Light amplification in all canopy glasses. It's like the light amp scope for your cockpit.** Jared still wants an under-ship landing camera. - Mark
- Are we going to see crafting stations in existing ships like the Carrack and Aquila? **Carrack, yes cuz it's promised via the "repair room". Repair = crafting.** They don't recall it ever being planed for the Aquila and are asking if anyone's seen that claim to let them know. - John
- Can someone give updates on the intentions for ship naming? **On vehicle content side, 2 things: all ships since Hercules are set up for it. From the art POV, they aren't happy with the current system. System needs enhancements. Huge amount of work needed on the platform side. It takes a lot of manual work for both propagation and language moderation. It needs feature work.** - John
- Battlecruiser info? The last concept ship from the crowdfunding campaign. Last concept ship. Only one left. **Implied by Jared that we'll learn more about it at ILW.**
### Community Questions: Gameplay
- Can you separate docking and hangar requests for ships like the Perseus? It'd be cool and should talk to the people doing the Command Module work. - John
- AI Blades? Still wanted. Still intended. MDC bugs are an example of why they're not ready yet. - Jared
- Are multi-crew rewards getting worked on to make them more worthwhile as opposed to a flat split? This is part of "Mission 2.0" mentioned in monthly update. - Jared
- **2026 schedule _SHOULD BE_ a marked increase in feature work. Don't expect the 2023/2024 pace, but a marked increase. Mention of engineering, then crafting, and quick name drop of "scanning/radar improvements"** - Jared
- We gonna see 'normal SCL/ISC' increase at beginning of the year? **Not going back to 2015/2024 schedule, but definitely definitely an increase with upcoming feature work and possibly other shows.** - Jared
- When are we getting the Polaris and other cap ships in PU shops? **Not every ship is going to UEC shops. These ships will be earnable/attainable in-game. Not every ship is going in the store. Examples: Crafting/WIkelo/Rep Gain.** - Jared
- Can we get a "general quarters" alarm on ships? **They want it. No plans currently though.** - John
- Will there be different types of ammo? That's still the plan, but that's more a game system thing. - John
- Are turrets going to be improved? That's Rich's team, which has had several passes over the years but they're not exactly where they want. - Jared
- **How issues/priorities are hit. This is something I've discussed many tiems on stream and Jared breaks it down well here: https://youtu.be/wGN_kUF8cAw?t=5975 This is how every place I've worked has accomplished issue work. Not unique to CIG.**
### Manufacturers Releasing New Ships in 2026
- Drake
- RSI
- AEGIS
- Anvil
- MISC
- Krueger **(name of the ship is "Stingray")**
- Grey's Market
- Origin
- GATAC
- Greycat
- Those are the one's releasing, not just the ones being worked on. - All
- **Big ship for IAE 2026 is the RSI Galaxy.** - John
