# Inside Star Citizen | 12/04/25 | [Engineering: Talkin' with Thorsten](https://youtu.be/0YoekgOOxwI?si=c3OMzSAQw2rg4JGF)
## With: Thorsten Leimann, Lead Systems Designer
### General
- All intentions they had still stand true. - Thorsten
  - Before, you have to be on your toes. You have to be very reactive to everything that is happening. - Thorsten
  - It was found to not be particularly fun. Thorsten
  - It pulls too much attention to these (maintenance) rather than the gameplay you should experience - Thorsten
- Direction they got is that engineering is now to extend the life of ships rather than "making your life miserable on a ship". - Thorsten
### Basics: Preventative
- You should prepare for travel:
  - Buy fuses so you can replace them when they break - Thorsten
  - Buy filled RMC canisters so that you are able to repair components - Thorsten
- Should hopefully be the first 5 minutes of gameplay. - Thorsten
- Thorsten is trying to get vendors added to the spaceports for this. It may or may not end up in 4.5 - Jared
- You can prepare by buying spare components to bring along so you can replace them. - Thorsten
- Single seat ships:
  - If you're not doing well/barely survive, you can now use the MFD to repair the components that allow you to travel back home. - Thorsten
  - This is an extension of the lifetime of the ship you've invested time in. - Thorsten
### Component Changes
- You have the chance to repair your components onsite while they're taking damage. - Thorsten
- Pre 4.5, you'd die from enough damage. In 4.5, you can repair components from 0 health. - Thorsten
- You can extinguish fires, repair afterwards, ready to go. - Thorsten
- That scales with the amount of people you can fit on your ship. - Thorsten
- The next chapter (4.5) is repairing/exchanging components. - Thorsten
### Relays
- They changed a little. Early tech preview/AC mode, relays were the weak point of the ship. - Thorsten
- It was originally thought to be a good idea. They could be placed in easily accessible locations and easily replaced. - Thorsten
- **However, expert players would eventually just target them specifically and quickly render any ship useless in "the blink of an eye'. This diagrees with the statement "we have to bump up the TTK (time to kill)".** - Thorsten
- Now, relays are important but if there are no relays, they won't support the full amount of power. - Thorsten
- It's important to repair for full power, but it won't stop doors from opening and other power needs. - Jared
### Fire
- Fire can happen in many ways:
  - Exterior-induced damage to your ship - Thorsten
  - Compoennts will trigger fire based on hits from bullets. - Thorsten
    - Energy weapons are most effective for setting interior - Thorsten
    - Ballistics have a very small chance of hitting components. - Thorsten
  - Mismanagement of ship causing components to overheat. - Thorsten
    - There are systems that will auto shutdown components if they get too hot but sometimes that's not always enough. - Thorsten
      - The temp rises so high that the component incinerates, creating fire. - Thorsten
  - Malfunctions, created by wear and tear - Thorsten
- Ways to deal with fire: 
  - Fire is dealt with by fire extinguishers. - Thorsten
    - Available on every ship - Thorsten
    - The more extinguishers pointed at fire, the quicker it goes out. - Thorsten
  - Venting the ship - Thorsten
    - This is done in 4.5 by daisy chaining opened doors to allow the fire to be vented from the outside. - Thorsten
### Review
- Engineering Loop in 4.5: - Jared
    - Repairing with replacement components and fuses if you have interiors. - Jared
    - Repairing those components and replacing those fuses if they take damage. - Jared
    - Dealing with fires. - Jared
- Along with engineering comes a full rebalance of ship items, components, weapons because engineering changes how the ship functions in the game. - Thorsten
- This gameplay fundamentally changes every space ship in the game. - Jared
- There's about 80 ships that'll have "everything", there are 30 ships that are in various states of completion. You'll be able to use engineering in one way or another. - Jared
- The feature is made to stay. This is the definition of Star Citizen and it's what we've wanted. - Thorsten
- It doesn't mean it is set in stone. Point out ways we can still improve. - Thorsten
- **We are not done yet with engineering gameplay. There are things still on the list and we're consciously holding them back because we think we're giving a lot and are scared of overwhelming the players.** - Thorsten
- **They want to now observe, figure out what needs to be added, and adjust.** - Thorsten
### Coda
- Decided to add armor to be released in 4.5 as well. - Jared
  
###  "See you all again next year!" - Jared